{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf824\cocoasubrtf330
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww15300\viewh17840\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural

\f0\fs36 \cf0 \
To: Peter Oates, Pfizer\
From: Robert Burrows, NE Biometrics\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 Date: 2006-03-15\
RE: Statistical and Mathematical Modeling of the Polyol Pathway\
\
Dr. Oates,\
\
Outline:\
\
	I.  What we want to do:?\
		Develop a robust mathematical model for the Polyol Pathway\
	II. Why this would be helpful to Pfizer?\
		1. Improve understanding and treatment of Diabetic complications			A. Determine control points in the pathway\
			B. Determine to what extent inhibition/agonism of particular enzymes change\
				the functioning of the pathway.  EG:\
					i. Is inhibiting Aldose-Reductase by 80% sufficient to significantly \
  					   reduce  the formation of superoxides?\
					ii. What effect would there be of a combined treatment that inhibits \
					    AR  by 60% and Sorbitol De-hydrogenase by 60%?\
			C. Allow prediction of the effect of a given compound, EG\
					i.  Superoxide formation\
					ii. Build-up of intermediates (Aldehyde)\
					iii. Changes in NAD / NADH proportions\
			D. Test hypotheses of mechanism of pathology\
					i. Build up of intermediates (eg. Aldehyde)?\
					ii. Generation of superoxides?\
					iii.  Depletion of nicotinamide nucleotides (NAD, NADH)?\
					iv. Over-stress of elements of the oxidation/reduction control system? \
 	III. What approach we would use?\
		1. Obtain candidate mechanism models\
		2. Combine Bayesian Statistical modeling with Deterministic Mechanism models to\
		    estimate necessary constants.\
			A. Obtain mechanism models from the literature\
			B. Develop 'prior' distributions for  rate constants, enzyme & metabolite \
			    concentrations\
				i. From existing literature\
				ii. From relevant Pfizer experiments\
				iii. From expert opinion of Pfizer (+ external?) researchers\
			C. Identify experimental data to use for fitting models\
			D. Fit candidate models using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)\
			E. Evaluate quality of fit and predictions \
		3. Apply "metabolic control analysis" (MCA) to mechanistic models to quantify impact \
		    of changes in enzyme concentrations on flux through components of the system\
	IV. Our qualifications?\
		1. Robert Burrows (Northeast Biometrics)\
			A. Ph.D. Biochemistry 1978\
			B. MSc Statistics, Univ. Rhode Island, "Statistical Modeling of Biochemical			    Pathways", 2005\
			C. Consults with clients on the application of statistics to biochemistry problems\
		2. Gregory Warnes (Pfizer + Yale)\
			A. Ph.D. Biostatistics, MCMC methods for difficult Bayesian problems, 2000\
			B. Former member of Pfizer's Diabetes Complications team\
			C. Experienced in applying statistical approaches to biological systems\
	V. Deliverables?\
		1. Summary of current mathematical models for the Polyol Pathway\
		2. Software for applying MCMC to fit one or more of these models to experimental data\
		3. Documentation and examples of using this software\
		4. List of putative control points in the polyol pathway\
		5. Estimates of the importance of each control point with respect to:\
			i. Overall flux through the polyol pathway\
			ii. Generation of superoxides\
			iii. Build-up of intermediates (e.g. Aldehyde)\
			iv. Changes in NAD / NADH proportions\
			v. Other significant metabolic changes\
 \
	VI. Funding Requirements?\
		I. Initial startup cost\
		II. Staged funding (see timeline)\
\
	VII. Timeline w. Deliverables & Funding Requirements?\
		I. Stage 1 - Proof of Concept \
			A. Summary of current mathematical models for the Polyol Pathway\
			B. Prior distributions for rate constants, enzyme & metabolite \
			    concentrations from existing literature\
			C. Identify potential experiment to test model\
			D. Generate simulated data from candidate experiment\
			D. Fit simple Polyol model to simulated data\
			E. Evaluate quality of fit and predictions relative to known values\
		II. Stage 2 - Design/Identify Experiments\
		III. Stage 3 - Fit simple model (polyol pathway alone)\
			A. Fit data to model via MCMC\
			B. Quantify the quality of the model fit\
			C. Identify & rate relative importance of control points\
				1. Bayesian simulation\
				2. Metabolic control analysis (MCA)\
			D. Report.\
		IV. Stage 4 - Fit expanded model (polyol pathway + related oxidative/reductive\
                   pathways)\
			A. Fit data to model via MCMC\
			B. Quantify the quality of the model fit\
			C. Identify & rate relative importance of control points\
				1. Bayesian simulation\
				2. Metabolic control analysis (MCA)\
			D. Report.\
		V.  Stage 5 - Delivery of software for simulating effect of changes to concentrations\
                    of pathway components (i.e, agonism/inhibition).\
			A. Software\
			B. Documentation\
			C. Training}